Questions.
Right.
Now, so I'll introduce Greg O'Connor, chair of the committee.
Greg Fleming from Maungakiekie. Pablo Garcia from New Lynn.
Kia ora. I'm Cindy Wong Brown, Green List MP based in the Wairarapa.
All right. So I think you've been here before, so we'll take your submission as
read, but speak to it and just
reiterate the main points. And, with both
agencies here, we're sort of quite happy to
merge, or not quite merge, but interact, shall we say, with both the-
Right
... submissions. So-
Do you want me to sit there so-
Yeah, well come on up. Yeah.
Yeah.
Probably since you're by yourself.
Have you got someone coming on Zoom, or it's just you?
Just me.
Good. Thank you.
Well, tena tatou katoa. My name's Glamis Taylor.
I'm the CEO of Public Trust. I've got Brad Sinclair with me, our general manager of
legal and governance.
We really appreciate the opportunity to appear before the committee today,
and speak to our submission on the petition of Simon Palmer, which raises
concerns about the cost of private manager examinations under what we
call the Triple PR Act in our business.
I expect that the committee's also aware that Public Trust appeared
before the Justice Committee earlier this month to talk on the
same issue, in terms of our work under that same
legislation. So I imagine that some of the issues will overlap with our
discussion there.
At the outset, I do want to acknowledge that the
personal and family circumstances described in the petition.
We recognize the significant responsibilities carried by people
who act as property managers,
for loved ones who lack decision-making capacity.
And we agree that the safeguarding arrangements under the Triple PR Act
must operate in a way that's fair, proportionate, and focused
on protecting the vulnerable people.
Our role in this framework is a statutory one.
Under Section 46, we're required to
independently examine the annual financial statements of court-appointed
property managers, and report back to the court on our findings.
We're the sole entity authorized to carry out that function.
And these examinations act as an important safeguard against
financial mismanagement or abuse for some of New Zealand's most
vulnerable citizens.
So our submission really focused on four areas: our statutory
role, the impact of recent regulatory and
funding changes, the steps that we're taking to manage costs
within our control,
and potential options for Parliament's consideration.
As the committee will be aware, three changes came into effect in October
2024. That's the regulated hourly fee
increased for the first time in 36 years.
The asset and income thresholds that require a
property manager were raised, and government funding that's previously
subsidized examinations for low asset, low income
cases was discontinued.
Now in principle, higher thresholds reduce unnecessary court
involvement. The practical difficulty really arises for
people already subject to existing court orders.
Many likely qualify now for the lower touch property
administration thresholds that have been put in place, but remain
bound by appointments that generally last three to five years with no
simple or low-cost pathway to make a change.
Now, this is what created what we have called a transitional group of people now
facing examination costs.
Often for the first time, despite having limited ability to pay.
And Public Trust has estimated that this affects around
1,000 to 1,500 New Zealanders. And we are seeing in
our work real distress, growing complaints, and increased debt
where there's no realistic pathway for recovery.
Mm.
Now, we're not a policy agency. We don't set the thresholds,
the funding arrangements, or the regulated fee.
And we don't have discretion to waive or reduce or
alter the charges. However, we have consistently raised
these transitional issues with officials and ministers, and we
welcome the committee's scrutiny on how the framework is operating in practice.
We note that the matters raised by the petition sit within the broader context that
the Law Commission's recent review of adult decision-making capacity
law, which was reported to Parliament earlier in the year.
Now that review
signals a clear direction away from the highly prescriptive one size fits
all arrangement toward a more flexible, proportional framework that
reflects autonomy, dignity, and modern understandings of
disability, while still maintaining the strong safeguards for
vulnerable people. Now, we support this direction and
principle. Public Trust also welcomes any parliamentary
consideration of legislation that is less prescriptive and
allows greater flexibility in charging and oversight arrangements.
This would better enable the fair and proportionate outcomes that we talked about
earlier, especially for low risk transitional cases such
as those raised in the petition.
Now, we're just happy to take any questions that the committee may have for
us.
All right. Well, thank you for that.
And I appreciate you have been back and forth here.
And of course, each of these committees, we sort of look at things through slightly
different
eyes.
Well, not different eyes, but for different reasons-
Yes
... perhaps might be a better way of explaining it. So appreciate that.
Any questions before... We'll shortly, um-
Yeah. Thank you very much for this.
I knew nothing of this before the petition came before the committee, so I found it
fascinating.
I know, appreciate your caveat that you guys aren't policy, but it's just...
So I'll try and keep my questions within the reality of that.
Sure.
So you say there's about 1,000 people affected by this. Is that right?
Yeah. We estimate about 1,000 to 1,500.
Yeah, okay. And so even with the recently
reviewed charges, once every 36 years, that's
not frequent, is it?
No.
And I know, I did the
prison value calculation and what it's gone to was very
reasonable in my assessment. It literally is just bringing it back up to speed with
where it was 36 years ago.
If you're talking, say, 1,000 people and it's what, on average working
out to be about $700, is it? About three hours worth of work?
Yeah, on average, a PME assessment takes around two to three
hours.
Right.
So about $600 on average.
Okay. So
even at the upper end of your estimate, it's less than a million dollars total,
isn't it?
That's correct.
So it's somewhere between a half a million dollars,
and the cost is a consequence of
a court order
for good reason. But yeah, I'm
not usually the person on the committee to ask for the government to pick up a
tab or something. But on this one, I'm looking at it going, that would be
an interesting recommendation to consider.
So to be clear, we have highlighted to the Ministry of Justice
that the transitional arrangements could be funded for just
under a million dollars over a period of four years.
So it's a total-
A million dollars over four years
... over four years-
So that, and that, and then-
... to allow the transition.
And at the end of those four years, you'd then be down under the new thresholds.
How many people then would still fall?
No, there would be no more transitional people because new people coming into
the system-
Would use the power of attorney
... will be property administrators-
Right
... that would not need examinations.
And equally, those then that may need to continue to have property
manager,
they would have to be over the raised
thresholds-
Yeah
... where
you would argue there is greater affordability.
Sure. Fair point. Do you have any idea of how many people would be at
that level in terms of, because that's a subjective assessment in terms of
relatives deciding whether that person is, whether it's really affordable to them
or not. I know it's not, it's an objective test, but I can imagine in four years'
time, people pushing back and going, "Well, it's still not very much money."
So
during that period of transition,
a couple of things will happen. One will be my existing property
manager order will come up for renewal with the court.
Yeah.
And because I now sit under the new thresholds, I'd be
able to apply to be a property administrator instead, which will
alleviate the need for examinations.
Oh, is that right? So no one will-
That's right. So you will not get examinations anymore because you're under that
threshold.
Okay. So literally in four years' time, no one will be having to get an order.
No one will be caught with a property manager order who qualify for a
property administration order.
Yeah. Okay. No, I appreciate that.
Sorry, I'm just trying to work out whether we can get any idea as to how many
people are still going to be in that category in the new limit where they will
still require an order.
So
people who have over the new thresholds,
which I believe are 25,000 for-
Property
... property. 30,000 for-
For income
... for income.
Yeah.
Those thresholds, the premise is, is that if I'm over those thresholds,
I have a property manager order, and I pay for private manager
examinations, recognizing that at that level, I've got greater
ability to pay.
Mm.
These transitional cases are ones that sit below those thresholds.
Yes, no, I understand that, yeah. No, I was just trying to get an idea of how many
are going to be in that new higher category in four years' time.
But I guess it'll still be a few hundred people or whatever.
And with our aging population and the increasing rates that we're seeing
requiring property manager orders-
Yeah
... and it would depend on average incomes and what was happening.
Sure. Yeah.
There's a number of economic factors that would play out.
That'd be difficult to assess. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Just but it's not the elderly, just the, it's also-
That's right
... disabled. My son's under one of these.
That's right.
Yes. So
how does that determine, so I know you've got to conclude, but just one thing.
No, I don't actually. Glenys answered it when her answer to Greg. Thank you.
Okay, and just to determine, how's the threshold determined?
Like measured, not determined, measured.
So at what stage, obviously income would be reasonably easy, but
the property, because you're going to have to have a valuation anyway.
How does that work? How do you know you've reached the-
Yeah, so the income's relatively straightforward.
Yeah.
That's based on what comes in.
The assets is more complicated, to be honest.
It's based on a combination of factors, though.
Financial statements from the subject person themselves, though also
working with their court-appointed counsel to make sure that between
all the various parties, so the court, Public Trust, and the counsel, we think we
have a reasonable view-
Right
... of what those assets are.
I think we get it relatively close, but you are right, it is a complicated process.
Yeah, because I just think of revaluations in that.
Yeah.
Particularly if that was a property.
Now, although you're not going to get much for under that, I know.
But yeah, I was just wondering how you reached,
how it was determined that you actually all of a sudden go over the threshold.
And there is an issue, and this is why having future
legislation that is less prescriptive may be
helpful, is that
there is also arguments in this space around what are liquid assets, right?
Yeah.
So for example, with your KiwiSaver, if you're, as you pointed out,
it's not always elderly people that are needing property orders
or property managers. And if they have KiwiSaver and that's the asset,
that's not a liquid asset that they can draw on to be able to pay for the fee.
And so-
Sure
... that is also a consideration that the legislation needs to take into account.
Are you aware where
MSD actually do pay these things on application, or
obviously you have to be
somehow
be done?
I'm not aware.
All right. Well, thanks. Well, look, shall we hear from, is it Goff
or Jeff?
Jeff.
Jeff. Sorry, it wasn't-
Jeff's spelled a confusing way.
Yes. Well, that was why I had to ask. I felt the need to ask anyway.
Understood.
It's all right. Thanks. Mr. Shircliff,
Commissioner, so we welcome to hear from you on
the-From the
Law Commission point of view.
Thank you.
Let me just start with a bit of context.
So,
we're a statutory body, and our principal job is
to make recommendations for law reform on areas of law that are
referred to us by the minister.
And once we've done that and published our modest
reports,
kind of the job's done.
Is that an annual report?
No, no, that's the report on adult decision-making capacity-
Oh, right. S**t
... that's been referred to today by previous submitters.
And I brought along just for a bit of context.
So once we've done that, then our job is essentially done, and we don't have a role
of ongoing advice. So,
I'm limited to effectively what we did for this report.
And in this report,
almost the first thing that we say is the Triple
P Act, the act that we're currently talking about, needs to be replaced
completely. So it needs to go. It needs to be replaced by modern
legislation which has a focus
on better compliance with the country's
international human rights obligations, and a key focus on
autonomy, dignity, and equality, and there's 175 separate
recommendations for what that might mean.
Some of the recommendations we make is that the idea of a court-appointed
property representative continue.
So,
there should be changes in the
basis upon which they're appointed, there should be some changes around who is
and is not suitable,
and there should be some changes around how they go about making decisions on
behalf of a person.
But importantly in this context, we also recommended that they
be subject to an ongoing requirement to prepare annual reports and
for those to be reviewed.
Late in the piece, after our submissions had closed on our second issues
paper, this issue came to our attention.
But at that point,
submissions had closed, so we haven't asked any questions about this.
And
though it's
obviously a significant matter, it was one amongst a huge
range of matters that we were looking at.
So, all we did in our report was note
that the issue has come up,
that we haven't looked at the issue under a particular act because we'd already
formed the view that this current act needs to go.
But we thought it would be helpful to identify some of the things which would need
to be considered
in a new act,
given that we had recommended that you should continue to have court-appointed
representatives and the reasonable anticipation that the country
will see more of them because however much we
publicize the importance of enduring powers of attorney, we've got significantly
increasing predicted rises of
cognitive declines of dementias, and that will inevitably impose a greater
requirement on courts for court-appointed representatives.
We also recommended that welfare representatives who look after a person's
personal care and welfare should not have a compulsory reporting
obligation, but that the court could order that they be
so, so that there could be an additional requirement for some sort of review.
So we thought that what we should do is say, in that new world,
here are some things that would need to be thought about if there is
going to be a fee charged
against the assets of the people who are subject
to court-appointed representatives.
And those things are not dissimilar to the things that would need to
be thought about, that presumably were thought about
under the current law, it's just we haven't thought about them in the context of
the current law. And so those things are...
The logic goes like this.
Under Section 19 of the Bill of Rights Act, everybody has
a right to freedom from discrimination on a prohibited
ground, a prohibited ground defined in another act, but includes
disability, and that includes intellectual and psychological
impairment.
Discrimination for those purposes broadly means treating
somebody differently on account of
that prohibited ground
in a way which results in material disadvantage to them.
So the first thing we said was, well,
it looks like there is a plausible case that the people who are
subject to
a court appointment are disabled and are treated differently to
other people. And so in this context, the question is, the amounts
you charge them, is that
a material disadvantage to them? And that has to be viewed
in context of the overall act, and it has to be viewed in context of the
way the particular fees are structured,
the extent of any subsidy, whether that's subsidy rebates
according to different levels of assets or income, et cetera.
If
the conclusion from that is that there is discrimination,
then the next test is whether that discrimination is nonetheless
justified, the discrimination in Bill of Rights terms
being you have limited their right to freedom from discrimination
because you're discriminating. The question then is can that be justified
under Section 5 of the Bill of Rights Act?
And that broad test is under Section 5,
whether the discrimination
is a reasonable limit on the freedom from discrimination,
demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.
And thatTest then the courts have
interpreted broadly to mean, well, does the discrimination
serve an important purpose? Which prima facie can
justify it.
Is the way that the right to freedom from discrimination is
restricted, is it rationally connected to the purpose?
Is their right to freedom from discrimination limited no more than you
reasonably need for that purpose?
And is that limitation on the freedom from
discrimination proportionate to the importance of the objective?
Those are not simple questions. They're really important questions.
But they are the questions to which the answer must be yes, for
any limitation on freedom from discrimination to
be justified.
Mm.
And so all we could do was really say,
given that we think there should be a continuation of reporting, that raises the
question of continuation of who pays for that.
Mm.
And it also raises the question, in the context of a new act,
of those questions
that you must answer.
Now those questions are, as I said, the same questions that you would answer
about the legislation today and
the way the legislation pans out today.
But I'm sorry, I haven't done that analysis.
All I can say is
that's the analysis which needs to be done.
Yeah.
All right. Look, so because just as a
petitions committee, what we endeavor to do is we're
pretty try to eliminate party lines in here.
We're actually trying to come up as quite a unique committee, as
any recommendations we do make,
we want to make sure they're based on
as many facts we can get.
Yeah.
And sending to the right place to hopefully get the right outcome.
So feel free, if there's anyone else you think we
could talk to that you're aware of, that
might have another
point of view on this, I just make that offer.
You may not immediately think of anyone because it's
clearly, without it being a ...
You're not a policy body,
so you'll do what you have to do, and you'll be making recommendations.
I was just wondering where the sort of slight gap between
your
two presentations, just wondering who would fill that gap.
The gap
comes from the Ministry of Justice who was here before us.
Yeah.
So I think you've already spoken to the people that we're talking to-
Yeah
... in terms of-
That's-
... transitional opportunities.
That's the-
We're also... And that connects back into the courts.
We've also been working with the judicial body to improve the
process.
Mm.
And so
that could be another avenue for you to talk to, is that
judicial body. I'm sure they have a view in terms of
some of the
challenges that they might have in terms of even implementing the
legislation through that level.
Otherwise I would say, the Ministry of Justice is definitely the people that
should be approaching.
And against the background, we know there's a lot of people who will exploit the
situation for their own benefit.
Mm.
Whether it's, um-
Could I just-
I just experienced that
... could I just add that,
I
think you're right to differentiate between people who are caught
by this generally and this particular transitional group-
Yes
... who currently have property managers, even though if they were appointed today,
they wouldn't need to be appointed.
They wouldn't, yes.
Yeah.
But our questions were directed generally to
the question generally.
Mm.
So
the question still needs to be answered in the affirmative,
that
someone who has say, $26,000 of
assets,
is it a proportional limitation on their right to freedom from discrimination
to mandatorily require them to pay $750 a year, for example,
for their accounts to be audited.
Which is the bottom line question, yeah.
Yeah.
And so that has to be answered even once you've worked
through this transitional group.
Mm.
And it's just hard to see how you get around the need for
notwithstanding the payment and who's paying.
Mm.
The need for, which is the whole basis of the Triple PR Act,
isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah. And as we said, we think you need a new act quite
badly. But that new act should continue to have
the ability for courts to appoint property representatives, and a requirement for
those property representatives
to have to prepare reports and subject them to
review.
The law should be
about protecting and promoting the dignity,
autonomy, and equality of people, and you can't do that without proper
safeguards.
Mm.
All right. Any other questions?
It's really
a question, it's actually a question to discuss
between the committee, but it's not a private question.
Oh, well wait, we'll discuss it afterwards.
Okay. Yeah.
But if there's anything we can give these people the experience-
No, I think it's been covered. I mean, there's two issues, and we might not be able
to deal with both of them, but we might.
All right. All right. So the main thing I said is, the
committee's now got a good understanding of how it all works, and I admit it, I've
learned a bit more myself. Having been not a property manager, a
welfare manager.
Mm.
Now I know what the property manager does.
Look, if there's no other questions from members, and nothing, no
other suggestions you think we would go other than obviously Ministry of Justice.
Policy work's being done anyway.
Yeah.
Great. Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. I'm happy to leave you with a little light reading if you want
to learn more about it.
We've all done speed read-
Let me know
... we've all done speed reading courses, so even their-